Switching :
	In large networks, there can be multiple paths
from sender to receiver. 
	Data transmitted through a network of intermediate switching nodes, which are not concerned with content.
	End devices recieving data are stations; switching devices are nodes.
	A collection of nodes is a communication network.
	A switched communication network routes data from one station to antoher through nodes.
	The switching technique will decide the best route for data
transmission.
	Switching technique is used to connect the
systems for making one-to-one communication.


Classification Of Switching Techniques:
		Diagram


Circuit Switching:
	Circuit switching is a switching technique that
establishes a dedicated path between sender and
receiver.
	A complete end-to-end path must exist before the
communication takes place.
	THe computer initiating the data transfer must ask for a connection to the destinatio.
	Once the connection has been initiated and completed to the destination device, the destination device must acknowledge that is really and willing to carry on a transfer.
	
	It is used for voice transmission.
	Fixed data can be transferred at a time in circuit
switching technology.
  Communication through circuit switching has 3 phases:
	Circuit establishment->Data transfer->Circuit Disconnect
  Diagram
Circuit establishment: This is the circuit setup phase.
		 Here the link is established between the sender and receiver. 
	When a connection has to be established between station A and station B, station A sends a connection request to node 1 through a dedicated link between station A and node1.
	 Then node1 sends the request to all the nodes connected to it.
	 The request is forwarded among the nodes finally forming a route to the Station B. 
	Based on its status station B sends the acknowledgment if it is not busy.
 	Thus a dedicated communication link will be established between Station A and Station B.
Data Transfer:
	Once the connection is established data is transferred from the sender to the receiver over the connection established.
	 This connection remains as long as the data transfer takes place.
Circuit Disconnect
	Once the data transfer is completed the circuit disconnects. The disconnection is initiated by one of the user i.e the sender or the receiver.
ExAMPLES: pUBLIC sWITCHED TELEPHONE NETWORKS,Optimal mesh network.

Advantages of Circuit Switching:
Establishment of a dedicated channel

Improves data transmission rate

Improves data loss

Improves delay in the data flow

			(or)
Advantages of Circuit Switching Network
Once the circuit is established there is no delay in data transfer. So it is useful in real-time data transfer like voice calls.
The communication channel is dedicated which ensures a steady rate of data transfer.
There is no need of packet sorting in the receiver's side because all the node follow the same path and in the same order.




Disadvantages of Circuit Switching:
Establishing a dedicated channel sometimes takes a very long duration of time.

The amount of bandwidth required is more for establishing a dedicated channel.

Even if a channel is free, it cannot be used to transmit any other data from any other source.
				(or)
Disadvantages of Circuit Switching Network
As the channel is dedicated it cannot be used to transfer any other data even if the connected systems are not using the channel. Hence circuit switching is insufficient in terms of resource utilization.
It is expensive as compared to other techniques because of dedicated path requirements.
The time required to establish the connection between the source and destination is high. This means that there is no communication until the connection is established and the resources are available.
It mainly used in voice traffic so not suitable for data transmission.

Message Switching:
	Message Switching is a switching technique in which a
message is transferred as a complete unit and routed through
intermediate nodes at which it is stored and forwarded.
	In Message Switching technique, there is no establishment of
a dedicated path between the sender and receiver.
	The destination address is appended to the message. Message
Switching provides a dynamic routing as the message is
routed through the intermediate nodes based on the
information available in the message.
	Message switches are programmed in such a way so that
they can provide the most efficient routes.
	Each and every node stores the entire message and then
forward it to the next node. This type of network is known
as store and forward network.
	Message switching treats each message as an independent
entity.

Diagram
Explaination : Suppose we have to send two messages i.e Message 1 and Message 2 from the sender to the receiver.
	 We will directly send the message without establishing any connection.

Advantages of Message Switching:
	Stores the message when the next node is not available
	Reduces traffic congestion due to its store and forward property. Any node can be used to store the message until the next resources are available to transfer the data.
	Data channels are shared by network devices.
	Manages traffic efficiently by assigning priorities.

Disadvantages of Message Switching:
	Storing of messages causes delays.So, the primary disadvantage of message switching is that it cannot be used for real-time applications like voice or video calls.
	The whole network requires a large storage capacity.As the message can be of any length so each node must have sufficient buffer to store the message.

Packet Switching:
	The packet switching is a switching technique in which
the message is sent in one go, but it is divided into
smaller pieces, and they are sent individually.
	The message splits into smaller pieces known as packets
and packets are given a unique number to identify their
order at the receiving end.
	Every packet contains some information in its headers
such as source address, destination address and
sequence number.
	Packets will travel across the network, taking the
shortest path as possible.
	All the packets are reassembled at the receiving
end in correct order.
	If any packet is missing or corrupted, then the
message will be sent to resend the message.
	If the correct order of the packets is reached, then
the acknowledgment message will be sent.

Diagram
Explaination: Suppose the data to be sent is divided into three packets i.e. 1, 2, 3.
 Now, these packets travel independently in the network.
 The intermediate nodes forward the nodes according to the availability of the channel.
 At the receiver side, the order of packets can be different.
 It is the duty of the receiver to re-arrange the received packets.

The path taken by the packet 1 is S → F → A → D → E →R. Similarly, the path taken by the packet 2 is S → F → A → B → E → R.
 Similarly, the path taken by the packet 3 is S → F → C → D → E → R.
	
Advantages of Packet Switching
Packets have fixed sizes, so the switching devices do not require large secondary storage devices. The storage was a problem in message switching which is removed here.
It is more efficient for data transmission as it doesn't require any dedicated paths.
If the link is busy or not available, the packets can be re-routed. This ensures a reliable connection.
The same channel can be used by many users simultaneously.
With improved protocols, packet switching is used for applications like Skype, WhatsApp, etc.

Disadvantages of Packet Switching
They cannot be used for applications that cannot afford delays like high-quality voice calls.
Protocols used in packet-switching are complex and require higher implementation costs.
If the network is overloaded then the packets may be lost or delayed. This may lead to loss of critical information.
Sorting of received packets is required at the receiver's side.


	